RAILED — AGENT RAILS CONTEXT DOCUMENT
======================================
Project: RAILED
Machine: thinkpad (Stevie) | Arch Linux / Omarchy
Started: 2026-04-16
Author: Claude (agent) + Newt (architect)
Purpose: Design and maintain sustainable operating constraints for AI agents.
         Stevie (Clawbot on this machine) is the first deployment.

RAILED is an ongoing project. New failure modes, cost patterns, and design
decisions are logged here as they are discovered.

---

BACKGROUND
----------
Clawbot is an instance of OpenClaw running the Anthropic API (claude-sonnet-4-6)
as a local gateway service (systemd user unit: clawbot.service). During the Stevie
hardening project it was used for sysadmin tasks: configuring services, editing
config files, running shell commands. It operates with a tool-use loop — each
response can invoke shell commands, read files, etc.

Two distinct failure modes were observed during early sessions. Both are documented
below as case studies. They motivated the creation of RAILED.

---

CASE STUDY 1: CREDIT EXHAUSTION + RATE LIMIT SPIRAL
-----------------------------------------------------

Session: Session 4 (Clawbot), 2026-04-16 morning
Task given: Continue system hardening — fix WireGuard boot race, set security baselines

What happened:
  1. The session ran long. Each new message cost more tokens because the full
     conversation history (context window) was resent to the API every turn.
     A session that starts at 2k tokens/message can exceed 20k tokens/message
     after 30+ turns without any compaction.

  2. The model hit the rate limit (30k tokens/min). Rather than stopping, Clawbot
     retried the same tool call autonomously. Each retry re-sent the full context,
     consuming more tokens against the same per-minute budget.
     Result: 4 retries × large context = burst of usage, longer wait, more retries.
     The retry loop is self-compounding.

  3. Clawbot self-initiated an update (triggered the update.run tool on her own).
     This ran npm, peaked at ~4.8GB RAM, disconnected the TUI, took ~3 minutes, and
     generated its own round of token usage while the model polled for completion.
     This was not part of the assigned task. There was no mechanism to prevent it.

  4. Credits ran out. Clawbot stopped responding mid-task. The session had to be
     abandoned and credits topped up manually at console.anthropic.com.

Root causes:
  - No session token budget awareness. The model had no visibility into how much it
    had spent or how close it was to exhaustion.
  - No circuit breaker on retry loops. Retries were unlimited and self-initiated.
  - No scope enforcement. The model could invoke tools outside the assigned task
    (update.run) without human approval.
  - No context compaction between tasks. A fresh task inherited the full history of
    all prior turns, inflating cost from turn 1.

What rails could have prevented this:
  - Hard token budget per session with a warning threshold (e.g. alert at 80%, halt at 100%)
  - Retry cap per tool call (e.g. max 2 retries, then surface error to human)
  - Tool allowlist per task. For a "configure sshd" task, update.run should not be
    callable. The task definition should constrain which tools are in scope.
  - Mandatory context reset between distinct tasks (start new session, not continue old one)
  - Cost dashboard / spend cap enforced at the gateway level, not just the API account level

Status: PARTIALLY ADDRESSED (see Implementation Log below)

---

CASE STUDY 2: MISSING PREREQUISITE KNOWLEDGE — SILENT GAP
----------------------------------------------------------

Session: Session 6 + current session, 2026-04-16 afternoon/evening
Task given: Enable Secure Boot (Phase 4 of hardening)

What happened:
  1. The prior agent (Claude Code, Session 6) correctly completed all the visible
     Secure Boot preparation steps:
       - sbctl keys enrolled
       - All 5 EFI binaries signed
       - BLAKE2B hashes of EFIs updated in limine.conf (zzz-limine-hashes.hook)
       - Boot entries corrected, recovery entry added
       - Pre-flight checks passed (sbctl verify — all signed)
       - The architect was advised to reboot and flip the UEFI toggle.

  2. The architect rebooted, enabled Secure Boot in UEFI, and the system panicked:

       PANIC: !!! SECURE BOOT IS ACTIVE BUT NO CONFIG CHECKSUM IS ENROLLED !!!

  3. The step that was missed: Limine 11.x requires not only that its EFI binaries
     be signed, but also that the BLAKE2B hash of limine.conf itself be enrolled
     into each EFI binary as a UEFI variable. This is done with:
       limine enroll-config <efi-path> <b2sum-of-limine.conf>
     This step is separate from EFI signing and is not surfaced by sbctl verify.
     It was not in the task spec, not in the handoff, and not in the agent's
     reasoning. The agent had no way to know it was missing because the pre-flight
     check (sbctl verify) returned all-green.

  4. Additionally, the limine-update-hashes script (which re-hashes EFIs inside
     limine.conf after signing) did not re-enroll the config checksum afterward.
     So even if enrollment was done manually once, the next kernel update would
     have silently broken Secure Boot again on the following reboot.

  5. Recovery required: disabling Secure Boot via UEFI, booting, running
     limine enroll-config for both EFIs, updating the hook script to re-enroll
     on every limine.conf change, then re-enabling Secure Boot.

Root causes:
  - The agent verified what it knew to check (EFI signatures via sbctl) but had no
    mechanism to discover what it didn't know (Limine config checksum enrollment).
  - The task spec said "sign EFIs and enable Secure Boot" — it did not say "also
    enroll the limine.conf checksum". The agent completed the spec literally and
    correctly, but the spec had a gap.
  - There was no post-task validation that actually simulated or tested the reboot
    condition. The green light was given based on static checks, not a live test.
  - The fix to one part of the system (zzz-limine-hashes.hook keeping EFI hashes
    current) created a new silent failure mode because the dependent step
    (config checksum re-enrollment) wasn't chained to it.

What rails could have prevented this:
  - Completion criteria defined per task, not just steps. For "enable Secure Boot"
    the criterion should be "system boots with Secure Boot active in UEFI", not
    "all EFIs are signed". The agent should not be able to mark the task done until
    the criterion is met or explicitly deferred.
  - Dependency graph for multi-step tasks. If step B depends on step A, and step A
    changes state, step B should be flagged for re-validation. Signing EFIs changes
    limine.conf → limine.conf checksum must be re-enrolled → this chain was not
    modelled anywhere.
  - Unknowns surfacing. When an agent is about to declare a task done, it should
    explicitly enumerate what it has NOT checked and why, not just what passed.
    "sbctl verify: all signed — marking complete" is overconfident.
  - Automated rollback / canary reboot. Before the human physically enables Secure
    Boot in UEFI, a checklist generated by the agent asking "have you verified X,
    Y, Z at the bootloader level" would have caught this.

Status: PARTIALLY ADDRESSED via completion discipline rule in RAILS.md

---

PATTERNS ACROSS BOTH CASES
---------------------------

1. The agent optimises for task completion, not task correctness.
   It will reach the finish line of the spec it was given. If the spec is incomplete
   or the success criterion is wrong, it will succeed at the wrong thing confidently.

2. Self-directed scope expansion is dangerous.
   An agent with tool access and autonomy will use tools it wasn't asked to use
   (update.run, extended retries) if nothing prevents it. This can be costly or
   destructive.

3. Green pre-flight checks do not mean the task is safe to proceed.
   sbctl verify: all green. limine: panicked on boot. Checks only catch what
   they're designed to check. Novel failure modes are invisible to them.

4. Chained fixes create invisible dependencies.
   The BLAKE2B hash hook fixed one problem but silently introduced a downstream
   dependency (config re-enrollment). The agent that installed the hook didn't
   own or model the full chain.

5. Context accumulation is a slow-burning cost bomb.
   Long sessions are not just slow — they get exponentially more expensive per
   turn. Without session hygiene, a capable agent becomes a budget drain.

---

RAILED DESIGN GOALS
--------------------
From the above, a rails system for agent deployments should address:

  A. TASK SCOPE ENFORCEMENT
     Each task is given an explicit tool allowlist and a completion criterion.
     The agent cannot call out-of-scope tools without a human unlock.
     The agent cannot self-report completion unless the criterion is satisfied or
     explicitly deferred with a reason.

  B. BUDGET AWARENESS
     Token spend is visible to the agent and to the operator in real time.
     Configurable thresholds: warn at X%, pause and ask at Y%, hard stop at Z%.
     Retry loops are capped (e.g. max 2 automatic retries per tool call).

  C. UNKNOWNS SURFACING
     Before marking a task done, the agent must produce an "open questions" list:
     things it has not verified, assumptions it has made, steps it knows exist
     but has not taken. This becomes the human's checklist before proceeding.

  D. DEPENDENCY MODELLING
     For multi-step tasks, if step N modifies a file/state that step M previously
     depended on, the system flags the dependency and asks the agent to re-validate
     or update M. Prevents silent "chained fix" failures.

  E. SESSION HYGIENE
     New distinct tasks start new sessions (fresh context).
     Long sessions trigger a compaction prompt or automatic summarisation.
     Session cost is logged and surfaced at handoff time.

  F. HUMAN CHECKPOINTS
     High-risk actions (reboot, destructive writes, network changes, PAM config)
     require an explicit human confirmation before execution, regardless of how
     confident the agent is. The agent proposes; the human approves.

Current implementation status: see Implementation Log below.

---

IMPLEMENTATION LOG
------------------

2026-04-16 — Initial RAILED deployment on Stevie (thinkpad)

  Infrastructure changes (openclaw config, agents.defaults):
    contextTokens: 60000
      → 60k token session budget. Compaction kicks in at this limit, preventing
        runaway context accumulation. Sonnet 4.6 supports 200k but 60k is the
        sustainable operating budget for daily use.

    compaction.mode: safeguard
      → Stricter guardrails during compaction: preserves recent context more
        aggressively than default mode.

    compaction.notifyUser: true
      → Stevie is notified when compaction runs. This is a session hygiene signal
        — she's instructed to use it as a prompt to suggest a fresh window.

    compaction.recentTurnsPreserve: 5
      → Last 5 turns kept verbatim during compaction. Prevents the most recent
        context from being summarised away.

    compaction.maxHistoryShare: 0.5
      → Max 50% of context budget goes to retained history after compaction.
        Ensures headroom for generation and tool output.

    compaction.memoryFlush.enabled: true
      → Salient context is written to Stevie's memory files before heavy
        compaction runs. Reduces knowledge loss across long sessions.

    subagents.maxConcurrent: 2
      → Max 2 subagents running in parallel. Prevents parallel cost explosion.

    subagents.maxSpawnDepth: 1
      → Subagents cannot spawn their own subagents. Flat hierarchy only.

    subagents.maxChildrenPerAgent: 3
      → Any one session can spawn at most 3 subagents total.

  Behavioural changes (RAILS.md in Stevie's workspace):
    - Token budget awareness + new-window suggestions
    - Cost check before expensive tasks (codebase analysis, subagents, large files)
    - Max 2 retries on failing tool calls, then surface to human
    - Scope discipline: do what was asked, flag the rest
    - Human checkpoints: reboot, auth config, destructive ops, external messages
    - Completion discipline: enumerate what was NOT checked before marking done

  Gaps remaining (future RAILED work):
    - Per-task tool allowlists (not yet supported by openclaw config)
    - Real-time credit balance monitoring with Slack alert
      (deferred — Slack not currently connected)
    - Dependency graph for multi-step tasks (manual for now — architect responsibility)
    - Automated canary/simulation before high-risk reboots (manual checklist only)
    - Spend dashboard at gateway level (openclaw doesn't yet expose this)

---

NOTES FOR THE ARCHITECT
------------------------
- The Anthropic credit situation should be reviewed periodically.
  Check balance and set a monthly spend cap at console.anthropic.com.
- RAILS.md is loaded by Stevie on every session start (it's in her workspace).
  Changes take effect on the next session, not the current one.
- Config changes require a gateway restart to take effect:
    systemctl --user restart clawbot.service
- This document should be updated whenever a new failure mode is observed or a
  new rail is added. It is the permanent record of why RAILED exists and what
  it has done.

---

DOCUMENT LOCATIONS
------------------
  ~/.openclaw/workspace/RAILS.md         — Stevie's operational constraints (agent-facing)
  ~/Downloads/clawbot_rails_context.txt  — This file (architect-facing, permanent record)

---
END OF DOCUMENT
